Thank you once again for getting back into
the room for our closing session in time.
We'll now begin the closing ceremony and
I'd like to invite her excellency Angela
Kariyoki
the Minister for ICT from Tanzania, WHO has
joined us fresh from her flight to address
us this afternoon. Waziri, welcome.
Excellencies,distinguished fellow honourable
ministers,industrial andsector experts
distinguished
panelists, ladies and gentlemen, good
evening.
I am deeply honoured to open today's panel
discussion and
my sincere thanks goes to Ambassador
Amandip Gil,the UN at the Secretary
andSpecial Envoyant Technology for
choosing Tanzania to
co-host their 2026th Open Source Week
together with other co-hosts.
Your exceptional leadership sets a powerful
example of the digital collaboration
that
is needed to govern our shared digital
future,distinguished participants as
we gather today
Tanzania stands ready to champion a
critical pillar of the digital future.
Inclusion within our digital public
infrastructure and
we understand the digital public
infrastructure
is a key foundation of systems for our
digital transformation.
The public systems like the digital
IDs,the payment getaways and
the data exchange networks
to succeed all these demands save everyone,
regardless of the geography, regardless of
the gender and also socioeconomic status.
Inclusion is not a secondary goal
it is the ultimate measure of the digital
public infrastructure
success.
Distinguished participants,from Tanzania's
experience
we have learned an important lesson
whereby the digital public infrastructure
is not only primarily a technology project,
it is a nation-building project that must
be inclusive from their design.
Tanzania's roadmap for
digital transformation outlines the
foundational efforts to ensure
that we build an inclusive digital
ecosystem where no one is left behind.
Tanzania's national development vision
2050,places ICT as
the backbone of our future growth.
We have set the clear benchmarks whereby
80% of the public services have to be
delivered
online and 70% of our people must have the
digital literacy.
To bridge the gap between these goals and
our current reality, we must move beyond the
traditional ICT and impress the scaling of
AI open solutions as essential catalysts to
fulfill the promise of our 2050 national
development vision objectives.
Today,our strategic partnership with
the private sector drives our commitment
to connectivity
but also forthe seamless
systems,interoperability through
robust digital public infrastructure.
We are not just connecting people, we are
building the industry's never system of the
future that is uncut by the first-class
digital infrastructure.
We have a national backbone of more than
27,000 kilometers of fiber,more than four
three
tired data centers and critical undersea
cable landings.
These efforts indulge the success by having
an internet penetration rate of 84.2%
making
our nation stands fully primed and
ready to drive the next wave of digital
transformation
under the able leadership of our
excellency, Dr.
Samya Suluhassan, the president of the
United Republic of Tanzania.
We are strategically advancing the Tanzania
technology stack integrating the digital
public
infrastructure.
The implementation of the digital public
infrastructure has significantly enhanced
the public service
delivery andaccelerated the financial
inclusion that
is evidenced by our 63.2 million active
mobile money accounts and58.1 million
internet users,30 million citizens WHO
are enrolled
in our national identity ecosystem
more than 12 million physical addresses
have already
been registered throughour national
physical addressing system
but we have also established
a national EKYC capability,a national
public key infrastructure
one national data exchange
platform and 14 sectoral interoperability
platforms that are connecting more than 800
government and private sector systems.
We've also strengthened the digital
payments through
the interoperable payment systems
interoperable QR payments and one of
Africa's leading mobile money ecosystems.
Distinguished participants
discussions on the digital public
infrastructure inclusion
is key today.
The inclusion requires us to move froma
fragmented,closed off digital systems and
to move into
a global technology ecosystem where no one
own a single system but rather we together
build systems that can be shared, accessed
transparently and enable collective decision
making.
However, to achieve all this milestone, key
foundational matters should be addressed.
First,each country should implement a
definitive strategy to build human capital
thatcan
actively contribute to development of DPI
open source solutions aligned with global
standards.
Our role must be to champion the cross
border collaboration,developing talents that
address
strictly to universal data practices but
also foster a cohesive global digital
economy.
Secondly, financing the DPIs.
Many countries have moved beyond the
question of whether to build DPI.
The challenge now is how to sustainably
finance the next generation of DPIs
including the
trust,services,governance,frameworks,capacity
development but
also long-term operations.
Third, we must not leave in closed doors.
Data governance shouldn't happen behind
the closed doors.
We need to create collaborative governance
and
transparent data practices whereby
countries
need practical support to implement the
data protection,consent management
responsible
data sharing andtrusted governance
frameworks that
strengthen the citizens' confidence.
Inclusion demands a multi-sector
approach,meaning thatgovernments
the private sector
the civil society, we all have a seat at
the table to negotiate the rules around data
privacy, data sovereignty, cyber security
but also the AI ethics.
The future, digital economy will increasingly
operate across borders and to unlock the
full potential of digital trade and
regional integration.
We need interoperable identity
systems,trusted data exchange frameworks and
seamless digital
payments that work across countries.
DPI should be built around an architecture
of open-source frameworks within the
objective
to transform the DPI as non-luxury asset but
a universal public good that ensures that
every citizen participates in the global
digital economy.
But also adoption of the AI brings its own
set of challenges on digital divide.
Through inclusion means that
collectively we can impress the principles
of responsibilities
ethics,transparency andaccountability
throughout the design,development and
deployment of
DPI solutions.
Distinguished participants, inclusion within
the digital public infrastructure, is the
definitive benchmark of genuine digital
cooperation.
A key takeaway for each of us is that the
DPI for inclusive growth is how each of us
will ensure thatevery country,not only the
most enhanced,can participate in and
benefit
from the emerging global digital
economy,expanding opportunities butalso ensuring
thatthere's
no citizen, no community and there's no
country that is left behind.
The United Republic of Tanzania is fully
prepared to unite withthe regional and
global partners
WHO champion and open, WHO champion secure
but also fair digital landscape.
I thank you.
Thank you so much, Minister Kairuki, for
sharing the experience of Tanzania.
Next we will hear a keynote on DPI
forinclusive economies
from the chief information officer
and director of the digital FAO
andagro-informatics division of the food and
agricultural organization
of the United Nations.
Mr. Dayan, I will not attempt to say your
last name as you advise but thank you, you
have the floor.
Thank you very much and good afternoon,
excellencies, honourable minister, colleagues.
Thank you forbeing withus andthank you for
the opportunity to say a few words on
behalf
of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the UN.
It has been a rich week already andtoday
we are here to discuss a topic that
sits indeed
in the heart of sustainable development in
the digital age.
The digital public infrastructure of the
DPI is there asenabler and
of inclusive growth
as the topic of our session today.
Around the world, economies are
increasingly powered by digital systems.
Yet billions of people remain excluded from
these opportunities that we see across the
DPI implementations wherewe look at the
identity payments,we have seen some examples
fromTanzania
data, public services, education,
healthcare, agriculture and markets.
The question before us therefore is not
simply how to digitalize societies but
how to ensure
that digital transformation is inclusive,
equitable and living no one behind.
We can see this ambition reflected in the
United Nations Global Digital Compact, the
GDC andrecognizing that
digital technology can accelerate
achievement of the sustainable
development goals.
But only if we work together to close
digital divide
expand participation in the digital
economy, promote trusted data governance and
ensure that emerging technologies benefit
all humanity.
Digital public infrastructure is one of the
most powerful tools available to achieve
these objectives.
DPI consists of foundational digital
capabilities such asdigital identity
digital payments
trusted data exchange and interoperable
public platforms that enable governments,
businesses, citizens to interact
efficiently, securely at a scale.
When designed forthe public good,DPI
becomes the digital equivalent of roads
electricity
grids and water systems.
So it's basically the infrastructure that
creates opportunity for everyone rather than
privilege of the few. However, technology
alone is not enough.
Digital transformation must be
inclusive,that's based andmulti-stakeholder
respecting
national priorities while promoting global
cooperation.
From this perspective,open source
cooperation and
DPI implementation in the context of
global
digital compact highlights a critical
lesson.
There must be a company by
governance,safeguards,standards,trust and
capacity building.
I can also offer a quick insight from the
FAO, the Food and Agriculture Organization.
How do we actually relate the DPI
andsituation in the world and
the agri-food systems?
We still have around 673 million people
WHO faced hunger in 2024, we know this.
We also have 2.3 billion people
experiencing food insecurity.
We also have 2.6 billion people that could
not afford a healthy diet.
So these numbers remind us thatdigital
transformation
including digital public
infrastructure,must
ultimately be measured by its ability to
improve livelihoods,strengthen resilience
andconnect
people to food services and economic
opportunities.
We can see how agri-food systems are
essential in making nutrition food accessible
andaffordable
to all, and the cost of inaction in this
area is very high.
To give you some idea,agri-food systems
generate losses
around 10 trillion US dollars each
year in hidden environmental health and
social cost.
So investments in transforming the agri-food
systems with help of DPI is tremendous.
So withthis sense of urgency andI think
common purpose here
we are looking at digital public
goods infrastructure not asan isolated
building blocks made of digital elements,such
asidentity
payments, government services or
tremendously useful.
But we also see DPI play a key role in
enabling food security
agricultural productivity,rural
inclusion and resilience.
Agri-food systems employ more than a
billion people globally
yet many smallholder farmers
remain excluded from digital services such
as financial markets, advisory systems and
government support in many cases.
DPIs can help close these gaps by creating
the trusted digital foundations that
connect
people, institutions and services.
Fios is DPI as a key enabler of inclusive
agri-food system transformation and I can
point out three distinct areas,first
inclusion
where digital infrastructures can help
farmers
access advisory services,climate
information,extension support
market intelligence and
financial services, including remote and
underserved communities.
Our joint work on digital inclusion
emphasize reaching rural populations
women youth and
marginalized groups to ensure the digital
transformation leave no one's behind.
I think it's true to say that
a few years ago there was almost a choice
to participate
in the digital economy, but that's no
longer the case.
We see that
community individuals not in a digital
economy are completely singled out.
The second aspect is interoperability and
public value.
I think this morning we heard also
fromAmadeep that
the importance of using DPIs not only
as a standalone solutions, but horizontally
and more importantly also across different
countries building their community support
for making DPI stronger and sustainable.
Third, the digital public goods and open
ecosystems, the FAO as an example has adopted
and promotes very strongly DPG-first
approach,recognizing thatopen,reusable and
scalable
digital solutions can help countries
accelerate digital transformation in support of
DPIs.
This vision strongly also aligns with the
digital global digital compact, which calls
for closing digital divides and expanding
participation in digital economy.
DPIs provide shared digital foundations
based on open standards,interoperability and
public
value.
Today a discussion,the distinguished panel
brings together ministers and
practitioners
from three regions at the different stages
of DPI maturity to share concrete use
cases
and transfer lessons on what makes
cross-border DPI work.
What financing andsafeguards are needed
and
what the global ecosystem might deliver
for
countries just getting started.
So I thank you for this opportunity and
looking forward to the panel next.
Thank you,thank you,thank you
forcontinuing withour closing program for
this afternoon.
I now invite Ms.
Stella Mokan and her panelists to discuss
with us DPI for inclusive growth.
Please welcome them with an applause and
our club once.
Thank you so much, thank you for staying
with us.
This is the last panel of very inspiring
and insightful DPI day.
The panel on DPI for
inclusive growth will tackle the questions
related to how DPI can
enable inclusive digital economies withthe
focus on cross-border use cases
regional interoperability
and practical lessons from implementation.
We started today witha session wherewe
learned a little bit more about
the ID lock initiative
that is being scaled across a lock region.
During the day we also learned more
aboutthe interoperability and
cross-border initiatives
that Estonian Finland is implementing
across the world in Africa
the SMART Africa initiative
is working on facilitating cross-border
data sharing between countries across Africa
through
the SADX initiative.
In Asia-Pacific ASEAN countries are also
looking into
how to leverage DPI to enable cross-border
data sharing,trade,cross-border
transactions and
these initiatives were also the challenges
and opportunities were also tackled in the
earlier session here in this room on how
DPI
can enable digital trade and digital
economy.
This has direct links withjobs whichis
also a big priority
a big development priority
in many of the countries we are coming
from.
We will look intosome of these questions
withour panel members and
it's a great pleasure
for me to introduce them to you andI will
start withAnna Maria Bermudez
WHO is a country
operations associate with Center for
Digital Public Infrastructure in the lock.
We will go to Nelle Lusk, WHO is coming from
Estonia and is representing the European
Commission here.
Armando Jose-Mansueta, WHO is Vice Minister
of Innovation and Technology, Ministry of
Public Administration of the Dominican
Republic andPeter Ngung,WHO is the founder
andCEO
of EvidenceOS.
Thank you so much for joining us today and
we'll go directly into the questions.
We know that and we've heard a lot today that
DPI is and can be an enabler of inclusive
digital economies and I would like to come
to you since you are coming from a region
that is experimenting and applying this in
practice.
If you could share withus a little bit
more about
some of the cross-border DPI use cases
that are being scaled in the lock region
and
how they are enabling the interoperability
the cross-border data sharing,enabling
better transactions between businesses but
also more
opportunities for the people over to you.
So, in Latin American and Caribbean, we have
already identified several use cases like
cross-border use cases and different areas
where these can create real value, right?
We have been exploring in health, in
agriculture and trade and in social protection.
For example,in health,since COVID
countries needed to ask the question on
how does one
country trust the digital information for
another country like without creating all
the bureaucratic mechanisms that they can
be reused for every country, right?
And I think that's the question that is the
heart of every cross-border use case that
you can find across the globe.
In agriculture,like you can say many use
cases,for example,in Peru
we are trying to enable
digital identity forfarmers thatexport
cocoa to the European Union and
they need to prove
about the deforestation thatthey do andthe
only way that
they can do it without frictions
is that they can also improve the digital,
like in a digital context.
But I think that the foundation for all of
these is the digital identity, like if you
can just find the right use cases around
the digital identity cross-border
you can enable
there like all the use cases thatcome
because
if a person can't identify digitally in
another
country the same way thatthey do in their
own country without extra restrictions
without
starting from scratch, none of the use
cases that we can identify will scale.
And that's exactly what I did have done,
that you have heard like around the day.
And you, Estella, knows really well about
this project too, like today, Brazil, Uruguay,
Colombia, Dominican Republic, Costa Rica,
Paraguay and Peru are part of an initiative
that allows people to authenticate on
government service platforms around the lack
using their
own national credentials,like
non-registrations,no parallel systems
and more than being able
to do that with digital identity is like the
trust layer that you can build across the
region andthat is what makes everything
possible,payments,trade,health
social protection
everything.
And the idea is that you can build in once
and then you can go and use that trust layer
that you have created around.
Thank you so much, Anna.
And one of the enablers but
also impediments in scaling some of these
good examples and
pilots is trust,whether we asconsumers can
trust these systems and
whether we have enough
information to trust these systems.
I would like to ask you,Peter,if you could
share a little bit more about
what is Evidence
OS doing and
if in your experience you could share some
of these use cases or projects
that have brought the trust to the
consumers and
if you think these are some of the good
examples thatmight be of interest to other
countries
both to improve service delivery
but also to improve cross border
transactions and trade.
Thank you for that question and it's a
pleasure to be here.
To respond,I would give a bit of a
background and
then walk up to kind of answer the
question.
The background is in 2021 I was witha
startup andthey had designed solutions for
different
brain, they call it neurodegenerative so
conditions that affect the brain.
We wanted to market these solutions to all
over the world essentially and Germany was
one of the places we looked at as a market
because of the service that we were using
which were located in the U.
S.
essentially they would not procure the
services because
they wanted solutions that would be on
premises because the service were in the U.
S.
they felt
I guess it doesn't meet the requirements
of the criteria for
what their local loss were.
The concept of digital sovereignty came
from
that experience personally my background
is
medicine and I have lived in Finland for
the last decade right next to Estonia.
One of the key things,at least how I
approach digital public infrastructure
starting with
identity, I moved to Finland for school and
the first month you have to get the calli
ten kilotonas so it's a personal ID I
think Estonia has to win as well.
It took abouta month or two to get it
without that
I think access to services was almost
impossible so banking can't really do
banking without an ID.
Accessing government services is also kind
of impossible but once I got the ID so it's
like a new world thatopens up becauseI
could do everything almost remotely and
then I learned
about what's happening in Estonia so
from what I know it's one of the most
digitalized
economies thatalso has economic benefits
because
they implemented these different elements
of DPI.
So to the trust question I've actually
spent some time on this spoke to the people
responsible
for X-road whichis the infrastructure
thatis between Estonia,Finland and
I keep forgetting
these other countries Iceland is a third
country.
But from that experience I think I learned
trust is one of the biggest barriers when
it comes to digital public infrastructure
becausewe are talking about
exchange of information
between in this case different companies.
Once I have the ID in Finland I can access
services from
different private organizations
governments andwith what they have
designed now potentially cross border and
transactions.
So then the question of trust comes from
when you are exchanging this information
they
are obviously cyber security and other
issues that could potentially be a problem.
But then the trust aspect also comes from
for example in Finland the solution is
called
Omakanta so it's what I can access my
health record and other things.
But just because of that identity that I have
I can access the education platform, I can
access the health platform, I can access
government services.
So the trust is WHOam I given my
information to
WHO am I authorizing to have access to
my information, can I kind of take this
consent that I've given back.
And I think that's some of the services
that
the implementation of this infrastructure
to the X-road it kind of tries to kind of
provide becauseyou can at least from
a legal
point of view you can tell WHO is
accessing what data.
The trust infrastructure is further
enhanced by the fact that
there is a vetting process
I believe for WHO is let into the network.
So I'm not the most technical person but
based on what I have read and what I have
evaluated it provides some level of
convenience that
provides access to the ordinary citizen.
I am from Cameroon. I don't know what the
identity situation is in Cameroon.
I also asked the earlier speaker WHOis
from
Serbia if they were aware of what identity
system is used in Serbia.
But just to conclude I think trust is very
important
trust is even more important when
we add AI now on top of the digital public
infrastructure.
The resources or the open source resources
are out there.
I think just affecting these open sources
and then putting them together.
It's essentially what evidence OS my
organization is trying to do and
it's what I encourage
people in the space to do as well.
The solutions are out there.
It's like trying to adapt them to the
local use cases.
Peter,can I build on what you just said on
specifically you mentioned AI and
we mentioned
AI all the time.
Why do you think trust is even more
important now thatwe are kind of so
enthusiastically
becoming consumers of AI?
Thanks for the question, so just a step back,
AI is not new, generative AI that provides
the fluency that most people know as chat
GPT.
I think it's what is causing some of the,I
want to say issues thatwe may have but
what
is the bigger issue is this concept I call
institutional intelligence.
So what,at least before we had generative
AI
we have what you call predictive models.
So given information, you can predict what
is going to happen.
That comes with its own risk, like it can
be wrong.
But with generative AI and how it has been
used now, we expose in potentially sensitive
data to someone else's infrastructure, and
that is a huge trust issue, at least for me.
And I see thatis what is potentially an
issue whenyou combine DPI andAI and
that's not.
Thank you. Thank you.
This is a good way for us to move to
Armando, WHO is coming from the government.
And the government of the Dominican
Republic is very,very proactive and
advancing fast
on its digital transformation agenda.
Today, I had a chance to speak with many of
colleagues that are not from the Dominican
Republic,but they've been mentioning
aboutthe great work that
you are doing in the country.
And not just on transforming,redesigning
services butalso bringing AI into
the service
delivery.
So how do you look at the governance trust
the safeguards agenda in the context of
bringing
AI into the DPI, but also bringing AI full
service delivery in the Dominican Republic
to ensure that people have the trust in the
services and they can enjoy the services.
Thank you so much.
It's a very interesting question that
puzzles me every single day.
Our take when it comes for, well, first of
all, the governance and AI and safeguards
and DPI is that we are turning DPI as AI
story as the same way we are treating DPI for
us.
It's a matter of creating a national
capacity,state skills for
harnessing this technology
not just only forservice delivery
improvement,but rather how the state functions
whether
it's the private or the public sector as a
whole.
So in that regard, having a proper governance
in place, it's not just something nice to
have, but rather imperative.
And for that, and defining properly how the
role that each sector should play into this,
it's essential,for example,when like the
minister mentioned this morning
we're drafting
what would be our own national DPI
framework and
the framework has defined clear
institutional
roles whenit comes forWHO does
what,whether it's the ministry
whether it's the GITA legacy
what the sector level ministry should do,
how they should do, how they should do, how
it's going to be the engagement withcivil
society
how the private sector should participate
WHO can access to what information in
whichconditions and
the specific guardrails that
should take in place when it comes for
data governance.
And stemming fromthat is that
we're defining what would be our national
DPI architecture.
We're finding for those basic governance
rules.
And of course, DPI AI is also part of this
internal agenda.
And we're defining what would be our --
what would be the first DPI-enabled DPI
blocks
that will support all of this.
But if you don't have the proper guardrails
around it andthe proper oversight
especially
when it comes forthe deployment of actual
use cases that
people will actually be using
and having what would be the human factor
that
should always be behind the delivery of
each
of the service, even though not necessarily
in the front office, but in any capacity,
you shouldn't be doing this at all
because the results might not be the most
effective
ones.
And instead of generating more
opportunities or equality foreveryone
you rather would
be generating a situation where you have
different class of citizens.
This is something you definitely don't
like.
Since AI is such a new technology, and we
don't know what we don't know, in working
closely with your colleagues in government,
how do you -- how do you make sure that you
are putting in place the right type of
governance,the right type of safeguards
also keeping
in mind that this technology is so
evolving so fast?
And how do you learn aboutwhat's possible
today and
what's possible -- might be possible
tomorrow? Yeah, exactly.
Because this is something new that is
evolving in a very rapid pace.
Having nonetheless rigid set of rules is
important
but also you have to have the flexibility
to keep adapting as the technologies keep
evolving.
So that's one thing.
But definitely,that should be someone
steering the development
someone doing the measurements
so analyzing what works andwhat hasn't
worked,just foryou to be quick and
have a rapid
response when it comes to the decision-making
process that's behind the rationale.
Also the importance of having a human
oversight present all times can give you the
right opportunity
to intervene at a certain moment to correct
any mistakes thatAI might commit while
delivering
the service itself.
So having that into place with something
that will help us out in the front.
And something that we're doing is basically
taking a handout from the DPI-safe manual,
and of course,we'll be adapting thatnot
just forthe DPI asa whole,but also for
defining
what will be AI-safe as well.
Thank you.
Nellie coming to you, and the question that
we have for you is more on the policy and
regulatory alignment.
European Commission, European Union, has put
out many framework strategies, programs to
enable cross-border data sharing of goods
of people.
How do you see the role of DPI in the
context of the EU ecosystem?
And what do you think other countries can
learn from the European Union in terms of
good practices that
can be adopted to enable regional
interoperability across other regions?
Thank you, thank you, Stella.
So I am representing here Europe, but as I
was said, I come from Estonia.
I served as a Stonier-Stake Ambassador, and
I'm really glad to see that the work that
was my job is being continued by my
panelists and
also other participants in this room.
But perhaps coming to DPI and what makes it
actually work, I would say that I haven't
seen any successful regional DPI case
without actually economic or other benefit
behind
it. And I think this is also the entire
idea of digital public infrastructure.
So we set these foundational elements of
payments,data,data interoperability
identity,not
only because they are needed, but because
these allow us to create some value.
And I have to say thatsometimes this is
also,let's say
forgotten in this DPI discourse
to see how we can improve governance, how we
can, let's say, support economic activity,
let's say,when we look at European Union
so if I want to participate in a tender
with
my company and some other European companies,
I don't have to go and prove that I'm not
in debt or a criminal or something similar,
but these data flows automatically, let's
say, across countries.
But you asked also fromthe policy andthe
regulatory framework
I think this is actually
where most DPI regional initiatives may
stall.
It is not aboutthe technological
interoperability
I think this can be solved quite quickly
but it's really the legal and policy
framework around it.
And this takes a lot of time, but I would
say there is a value of Europe, of course,
we have the interoperability framework, we
have now the interoperability act, we have
the framework for identity, we have EIDAS,
and these are good examples to inspire other
countries andregions andI do not mean here
to copy what has been done
but just see where
these issues are and what could work, what
not, and what could be amended for different
contacts and countries, but I think where
the real value is, is that it has been put
in practice.
So we have actually worked on the
institutional and
organizational processes across 27 member
states and they are not that similar, I can
guarantee you that coming from Estonia, I
may not think that everybody is in the same
page when it comes to tech and innovation,
and we have managed to put it to work, not
only inside European Union, but also across
EU and other countries.
So Europe has finalized,let's say the mutual
recognition of digital identities with
Ukraine
and Moldova,it is finalizing it now
withEgypt andBrazil
and I think this is an experience
that is immensely valuable,but perhaps
some lessons
and I have here a little bit of Estonia
Estonia had,so whenwe talk aboutthe
regional DPI,we also actually talk about
differences
the regional differences, we have countries
that are advanced, we have countries that
are not advanced,and then there is a
question,so how do we find this middle line
withthose
WHO want to go really far and those WHO are
still catching up, and of course there is
quite a bit thatcan be done,but I would
maybe like to stress one that
what is important
is actually to have the capacity andto be
by the table where
the technological standards
are discussed, where these policy frameworks
are discussed, where the legal frameworks
are discussed andset,even if the country
is not yet implementing DPI
because otherwise
what will happen is thatothers decide
these frameworks,the standards
and then you are
in a situation where you have to implement
something that was decided by the others,
this also means thatwe actually have to
invest heavily in the capacity
I would say also
in the regulatory capacity,to be in the
table andhave these discussions
but having said
that, coming from Estonia, I would like to
maybe just say that it is not often those
that are lagging behind the obstacle for the
cross-border data sharing and services, I
was involved in a big pilot of Europe
called the top project
so basically this focused
on cross-border data sharing anddigital
services
and then we were looking at the obstacles
and then to my surprise I found out
thatEstonia was not the most active partner
because Estonia
did not trust those thatwere lagging
behind
so it's not actually always the ones that
are behind thatare not eager to share data
across borders
it can be also the other way
around, so actually this landscape is a
lot more complex than we might think.
Thank you,and I picked up several
important messages fromyour intervention
putting things
in practice, it's very important, and then
something that we don't usually talk about
as much aswe probably should,it's building
regulatory capacity
and taking every opportunity
to participate in the dialogue andplatforms
withstandards,with the policy and
the regulatory
frameworks are being set up or defined.
Since you've been, you mentioned that
you've been
a tech ambassador,and we are getting close
to our session
but I'd like to hear everyone
on the panel in terms of,if you were to
share one recommendation witheveryone WHO
is in
the room today,and we have participants
fromthe ecosystem,but also policy makers
decision
makers,what would be thatone
recommendation,one key takeaway
but you think it's very
very important to not to forget aboutwhen
it comes to building DPI for
inclusive growth
and I'd like to start with you, Ellen,
since you've been the tech ambassador.
Yeah, thank you.
I think I will continue from this regional
perspective that I'm representing
here, so I think while we should be aiming
at all these frameworks in place, agreements
in place, regulatory frameworks in place, I
believe that sometimes we cannot wait until
all this is placed.
So when there is a political will, when
there are resources, when there
is an opportunity, I would simply encourage
everybody to start working with each other
also across borders,because it's only by
doing that
we can develop the needed frameworks
and also actually build the trust of doing
things. And I would close with my opening
sort of statement to say that when building
DPI, I think in parallel, we should really
building the cases for DPI to see what we
are actually needing these for.
Thank you.
Anna, over to you, any final thoughts?
One recommendation is really hard.
I think
people that work implementing DPI have
many, many learnings from what we have done.
But
if I have to pick three,I will pick the
first one is that
you need to relate or correlate
the government's goals withwhat you are
building asa news cases for
the cross-regional initiatives
because this usually is disconnected.
And like the fuel that you have when you
are doing
something new andyou are trying to be part
of something thatis working regionally
that
fuel ends in a point.
So you need to really connect what you are
doing with the government
goals and what the priorities of the
government.
And it is really like solving some problem
for the citizens.
And I think that can give more scale and
more adoption that we think.
The second could be like just start
like countries spend amounts of time
designing the
perfect solution in DPI, but in general in
technology, but in DPI happens a lot. The
perfect use case, the perfect governance
model.
And I understand why like DPI touches
identity
data payment regulation and
that feels like you need to get it right
before you do it
because you cannot fail on that, right?
But the evidence and our experience,
especially
in lack of writing globally, it is that the
countries that move fastest, they have to
work from a baseline, even if it is an
imperfect one.
So like there are a lot of conversations
that you can have like around
forexample,as Nellie said,about governance
about frameworks
government regulation
but those conversations in earlier stages
of DPI doesn't get to anywhere.
Like when countries really understand what
is DPI, what they are building, what is the
use it for,you can start having
conversations valuable forregulation from
frameworks and
so on, like related with the real capacity
of DPI and not with a theory or a framework.
And that leads me to the third one that is
use cases are never as clear as we assume.
Like in every implementation that we have
like co-operated with in luck and globally,
we thought that we have use case, identify
use cases, but when you are really getting
that to operation, that it doesn't make
sense.
And probably it's not that use cases that
you are aiming to and they are not related
what you want to do.
So like talking and like
giving the time to talk about the real use
cases that you are going to operate with DPI
is something that you need to do.
And actually at CDPI we are testing this
methodology to
close thatgap and
that in one week the countries can like
really see what they are building
in the technology bar.
Because we have been saying the whole day
I have been listening
like technology is not the hard part.
The part is regulatory.
The hard part is the standards
and so on.
But countries takes more than a year
trying to understand the technological
part.
Like that's our experience.
And yeah, we say that is the easiest part
but it's not
the easiest part.
So we are trying to work at CDPI in a
methodology that can be really
easy andthat in matter of weeks we can
just show the countries what is DPI
what is useful
for and that we can have a road map of
documented use cases.
So in you as a country can understand
what is it?
Can trigger conversations about regulation
and all that you have to do for
adoption and for scale.
But you can also have a road map of
prioritized use cases that can
really work for the countries.
And I thank you for anchoring us into the
problem.
Focus on the problem to solve first.
And thank
you for the call to action. Just start.
Peter, any final words from you?
First, thanks for having me on the panel.
And it's been very interesting listening
to the
rest of the panelists.
I picked up on what you mentioned about
the project that you're
working on where Estonia does not trust
the other participants.
That was a long time ago. So hopefully
this has changed.
So it speaks to the question thatyou have
just raised and
she also mentioned technology
is not the biggest barrier anymore.
I think bringing the right stakeholders to
the table
from the beginning is one of the ways that
you can ensure a smooth implementation of
most of these solutions.
So she mentioned political resources.
I think resources is one
of the issues that may affect certain
places.
DPI comes after electricity, comes after a
lot of other things.
And those other things, there is still
lots of inequality that haven't
been addressed. So even though we have DPI
and we are adding AI to it, I think, into
the relation of how the inequalities
thatthis may magnify should be something that
should
be seriously considered. Thank you.
Thank you for bringing the inequality in a
final closing words.
Armando, from a government
representative to the government
representatives in this room
what would be your key takeaways?
My key takeaways with all of this is that
you have to have a two-pronged approach when
it comes for this topic.
You have to have the first working on the
top on all the political
action andagainst all the political
conversations,defining the policy
defining the regulation
and so forth.
While at the same time, you have a
bottom-up approach where you have not just
the society,but also the technical
community
not just defining what would be the
product
defining what would be the use
cases,understanding their user needs
but also learning by shipping
by start building, by start showcasing, by
start doing.
Because if you wait for the policy
to get the policy right or to have the
right political approval fora specific thing
nothing
will happen.
So if you really want to enact real
change, you need to start working at
all levels and getting everyone involved
as much as possible.
Because that is the only
way you can see andrip the benefits of
having DPI as
the core of your strategy or the core
of the what would be your ideal state in
the future.
Thank you.
Thank you to all of you forsharing your
insights,key learnings in how by leveraging
DPI we can enable better services and
better cross-border partnerships.
And we hope that
everyone WHO joined us for this panel found
this discussion insightful and interesting.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Stella, and the panel
for your insights.
And I want one
club for you all in one, two, three.
For sparring through to this hour, kudos
to you all.
The DPI community in the world is a better
place because
of you people in this room today.
Now we're going to the last,last,last
session of this day
which entails a very interesting
preview.
And for that, I believe the setup is now
complete.
Drum roll, please.
I finally
invite back on this stage, our USG, to
open up this closing session. Thank you.
Thank you, Nanjira.
Really, kudos to all of you.
We're nearly there.
So I will be very
brief and just not sum up the day, but
just point to you some highlights.
It's been an
exciting day, right in the middle of the
open source week.
So we are half a there.
Remarkable
day.
I want to acknowledge the presence of the
minister from Tanzania WHO's come straight
from the airport to this meeting hall,
delivered her keynote address.
Madam Minister, thank
you.
Thank you.
Your commitment, the commitment of other
ministers WHO've spoken throughout
the day,given us these exciting insights
fromhow it is to develop and
implement DPIs nationally.
They have made this day very special.
So just to perhaps reflect on how this day
comes together,
how this week comes together, it is none
of these sessions were run alone.
So the entire
program is co-created with partners from
across the ecosystem.
And that's the way we show support
for their work.
Digital cooperation, which is our mantra
here at the Office for Digital
and Emerging Technologies, does not work
alone.
It only works when we bring different
stakeholders,
different regions, different perspectives
together. And all the UN entities involved
in the implementation of the Global
Digital Compact are here.
They've contributed to the
governance of this week.
They've contributed to the design of the
program, which as I mentioned,
showcases the achievements of the entire
ecosystem.
So this is digital cooperation in
practice,
not the UN talking,but the whole
community,leading governments
international organizations
the open source tech community,
philanthropies and the private sector.
Our role today was to
convene and to connect.
Now, we've learned today that DPIs
continue to be a high priority
for member states.
Everyone has understood that this approach
is strategic.
It allows
you to use limited resources witha maximum
impact for
building an inclusive digital economy
or building a more responsive government
that's closer to citizens' needs.
The issue is not
the Y of DPI. It is now the how of building
DPI safely, inclusively and at scale. We
know very clearly now through the insights
that have been generated by this community
that DPIs development potential comes only
whenthey are built with
trust together with
all members of society.
And today, it's clear that when we take
into account all perspectives,
DPIs can deliver real value.
We heard today how countries are taking a
more sophisticated
approach to building out DPIs, connecting
it to the AI challenge, but not confusing
it with chasing this pot of gold at the
end of the AI rainbow.
So, keeping their sites
clearly on serving the people and being
agile, being deliberative about that goal.
During
the breakout sessions, which were really a
highlight of the day, whether the focus was
on financing andother challenges or on
interoperability,we heard candidly about
the gap between
ambition and resources.
The financing needs surfaced across all
our panels, and the financing
round table this afternoon was very
helpful andsurfaced for
us the urgency of the challenge.
And we are really grateful to the
international financial institutions
the philanthropic foundations
WHO are funding the DPI space for coming
together on that particular track.
Development banks,
owners andfoundation,the open source
community,everyone coming together,UN partners
with
not only offers a support, but guidance on
how to layer the investments from national
budgets,philanthropic grants to private
sector contributions and
then multilateral development
bank investments.
So generosity matters, availability of
finance matters, but how we organize our
cells to absorb it and in which direction
do we spend it that matters a lot.
Let me just say a word about the safeguard
side of it.
It's the DPI safeguards initiatives.
I think member states made a strong commitment
in the global digital compact to this
aspect
of safeguards which build trust, which
leads to adoption, which leads to impact.
And so
the safeguards initiative is built on
thatsimple premise that
without safeguards citizens
will not trust DPIs and without that there
will be no adoption and no digital dividend.
So this is an example of different
stakeholders coming together to develop the
safeguards initiated
the UN system coming together, working
with them and achieving impact as a result.
And
this is why,today,I'd like to invite two
people WHO
symbolize this corporation to join
me on stage.
So Raji, Raji Chandshikran from UNDP, join
me in applauding her.
So UNDP,
which co-leads this initiative with Oded,
and then CIVI Madhukar from co-develop, WHO's
a strong advocate and supporter of this
work directly and across the ecosystem.
So Raji,
the DPI safeguards initiative has recently
launched the accelerator and
I'm sure you're
going to speak aboutit and
some of the other interesting
interventions being planned to
accelerate DPI with safeguards.
And I believe this will be very relevant
for the community
here.
And Madhukar has an exciting announcement
to end the day.
But to take this forward,
I'd like to invite my colleague Moritz from
Marshall to come and join them on stage.
Moritz, over to you.
It's horrible.
Yeah.
Thank you, U.
S.
Jigal.
It's a privilege to
be here on behalf of UNDP.
And we're deeply grateful to your
leadership and your team's
partnership working with UNDP on advancing
DPI over the last three years.
Together, we
have made safeguards central to a lot of
global conversations.
The amount of times we heard
safeguards,inclusion,trust architecture
today is an incredible success that
we have achieved
over the years.
We also have the DPG and the open source
community building with safeguards.
A shout out to a lot of the DPG WHO have
reached out to us in the last two days to
discuss how we are building it as safe and
secure.
It is an Intel inside moment for the
DPGs at this point in time.
We are also learning with our lighthouse
countries, whether it
is countries WHOare starting new,like
Dominican Republic,or countries WHO
are evolving an
older system like Brazil with a cadastral
ambinatal rural evolution with safeguards,
or people WHOare building withmature
setting like Agri DPI with
AI in Maharashtra in India
that we are seeing, wherever it is, we're
seeing countries coming and asking how do
we adopt safeguards into it.
We also acknowledge Minister from Tanzania
WHO are also building
it with safeguards and going for inclusion
in a very big way. Thank you, ma'am.
Learning from this over the years has been
that people are not asking why safeguards,
but they're asking how safeguards, and for
that there is a need, there is a place for
these conversations to take place.
There is also funding which needs to
occur.
The accelerator
has come out of these learnings of the
past few months of work, years of work.
We have
opened up the accelerator to bridge this
gap between the framework and actual action,
developing governments,their advising
organizations
and CSOs to partner to work together and
embed safeguards.
So this accelerator that we have opened up
is open for two different
kinds of entities to start with.
It is for civil society organizations and
UN organizations,
though we are getting a lot of requests on,
"I am neither this nor that how do I work
with you all." So we are still looking
into those kinds of applications.
We are looking
at live work which is taking place.
It could be in foundational systems like
digital ID
payments or data exchanges or sectoral
applications across health,agriculture
climate,financial
inclusion, social protection, et cetera.
Each applicant is requested to propose the
safeguards
effort in two kind of areas.
Either one of these, you could be looking
at system level
work whichis a national level assessing
risk that
you see across a DPI or the digital
ecosystem
and how we can build a roadmap.
Or you could be specifically talking about
a DPI or risk
that you are seeing such asa redressal
mechanism whichneeds to take place
or how do we improve
uptake from, let's say, women or from a
certain marginalized community.
We are open to both
kind of safeguards work.
The only requirement that we want to
underline is that it should
have meaningful civil society engagement
anda very,very active role throughout and
it's
not a one-off consultation in all of these
applications.
In return, the participants get
practical tools, ecosystem expertise, a
global peer community and catalytic funding.
You
get anywhere between USD 40, 000 to 70,
000.
If you are funded but yet you want to be
part
of this cohort,there is a non-funded track
whichyou can be part of so
we are super excited
for countries, for the UN advisors and for
civil society to join and share their work.
This is also a call to the ecosystem over
here. You could be sharing your expertise.
So please join us as
a partner or an enablers collective to the
safeguards accelerator.
Our
team is over here and we are happy to have
this conversation with you.
This accelerator
is in collaboration with 50 and 5.
The Open Government Partnership, OGP, and
Code Develop.
And the applications for this inaugural
cohort is open right now.
We are taking applications
as three waves.
The first wave is June 30th.
The next one is July 15th and the last one
on July the last.
So we really hope that you have got enough
things to talk about today,
learn about and you will come up with
applications for us.
Before I hand it to Moritz, a last shout
out.
There was much which was discussed about
funding and financing today.
We will be soon
launching an open call for inviting two
kinds of applications.
We need actual practitioners
from Ministry of ICT, planning and finance
so that we can learn about what is the cost
of DPI,how much goes intothe early part of
the build andhow much goes into
the implementation
and where does safeguards fit into this
costing process.
We are also calling for practitioners
WHO have built these long Excel sheets,WHO
have lived these project documentation
WHO
have lived experience to come and
present their point of view to this
ministerial group.
So we are looking for two calls, one from
experts and one from the actual practitioners
WHO are building this.
So please do watch for this and engage
with us.
With that, thank
you. Thank you for bringing a great
audience and over to you Moritz.
Thank you very much, Rajim.
Also, hello from my side.
It is a pleasure to be here.
Part
of my job is to work with
many people here in the room on the DPI
safeguards initiative
from the office for digital and emerging
technology side.
And I would like to highlight a second
way of how you all can engage with the DPI
safeguards initiative.
And that is by joining
the action tracker of the initiative. And
it is a way how every organization here in
the room that
works on DPI safeguards can make their
work visible on a global platform.
So the action tracker will go live early
next month.
And it will be a platform where you
can showcase the work that
each of your organizations does on
advancing DPI safeguards.
Through
the action tracker, you will have
officially endorsed the framework.
And we want to provide
you all with the platform to show the
great work that you all do.
And I don't want to
take up too much time becausewe do have an
exciting announcement from
Maducar on where
this community meets next.
And I believe that we have a video for
which we would need the
slide pick up there. And so on.
Service enrollment without any complicated
steps.
These are the moments digital public
infrastructure makes possible.
Behind them are shared rails, digital
systems designed
for public use,built
withsafeguards,connected to real services
and shaped around people.
Across the world, countries are deploying
DPI for social and economic impact.
In Indonesia,
business and B.
I.
fast are changing everyday commerce,
making payments easier and more
affordable with MSMEs at the center.
In Brazil, picks and the country's DPI
stack show how
digital public infrastructure can become
part of everyday life.
Lowering transaction costs,
expanding participation and creating
measurable economic value.
In Ethiopia, finder shows how
fast foundational identity can scale.
In less than a year, enrollment reached
over 40 million
people, nearly half the country's adult
population.
In Ukraine, Dia shows another kind of
impact.
Public services that continue to reach
people even in war.
In India, identity, direct transfers
and UPI have helped access move at
population scale.
Lowering costs and expanding digital
participation.
And many more countries are contributing
to this movement with their own
implementations and lessons.
Every country's journey is different.
Some begin with health,
some begin withagriculture,some
withpayments,identity,social protection
public services
or crisis response.
But all are working toward a shared
objective, building more efficient,
inclusive and trusted societies.
At the 2027 Global DPI Summit, we will
gather not just
to ask what is possible, but to learn how.
We will ask, what was built?
What did we learn?
What changed for people?
From Cairo to Cape Town, the Global DPI
Summit has brought the
DPI community together.
In 2027, the summit heads to Asia for the
first time.
Ahead of
the summit, we are asking our community to
share stories of DPI implementation.
If your
country has used DPI to create real human
impact, we invite you to share it.
Bring your
evidence.
Bring your lessons.
Bring your ambition.
To the Global DPI Summit.
2027.
Building the
infrastructure of trust together.
Thank you to our colleagues at Orit and
UNDP for having
us at Co-developed participate here. This
partnership has been important for us for
a number of years now andthe important
work thatthe UN system and
many partners in the
room have done over the last few years is
really a sign of progress in the many
countries
that are participating.
As we've thought about the Global DPI
Summit, when we started Co-developed
about four years ago,we thought we should
do an announcement that
we are launching Co-developed
if it wasn't exciting, nobody knew what we
wanted or what we would do. We said let's
do some work forthe next two or three
years,work withthe larger community that
will actually
shape this ecosystem of DPI.
Two years ago, when we started the idea of
DPI, we reached
out to the audit office, UNDP, World Bank,
ITU, and WHO came in as co-hosts along with
us to shape this Global DPI Summit that we
just saw here.
This is actually, of course,
there are four of us as co-hosts this
time.
The Asian Development Bank has reached
out.
They would like to participate as co-hosts
as well, welcome them with open arms and look
forward to co-shaping the agenda for the
2027 Global DPI Summit.
This summit really is a
celebration of all of the collective
progress we've all made over the last few
years.
I
have been in the DPI space for a few years
now.
DPI was not on the radar three, four,
five years ago.
I think it has taken all of us to actually
get this DPI to center stage
really.
If you look at all of the conversations
across countries, across institutions these
days,digital invariably has a DPI
component
an active DPI component in the
conversations.
I think that's progress.
We should celebrate the progress, and I
think Bali would be a
great place.
Welcome all of you to participate andbring
in our ideas
bring in our accomplishments
share your failures so we can learn and
continue to build this amazing community.
Thank you
very much for the opportunity.
Look forward to seeing you all in Bali in
a few months
from now. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much, Madhukhar. The Office
for Digital and Emerging Technologies is
really proud to be co-hosting this event
alongside a lot of other entities from the
multilateral system, and oh boy, I'm
looking forward to going to Bali.
And all that is
left now at the stage is to thank you all
for coming here.
I would like to particularly
thank the member states WHOare co-hosting
this event andthe delegates that
participated
here.
It is really also your leadership that
allows us to carry this agenda forward, and
a big thanks goes to our partners WHO have
made this week possible, WHO have made many
receptions on all of the evenings possible
throughout the week,but first and
foremost
thank you all for coming here today.
Lastly, the event is not over.
We have the Ospos
for Good Day tomorrow.
So do come back tomorrow, because tomorrow
we will discuss how institutions
build andmaintain the knowledge to sustain
everything that
we have discussed here today.
Thank you all. And I look forward to
seeing you at the reception.
I think one thing we need to ask Maruka,he
didn't say when
so we start booking our tickets.
The dates came up.
Did everyone grab the dates because I know
ticket prices.
Thank you once
again for when we're looking forward to
the DPI summit.
Thank you to Odette in the office
of ICT for hosting this DPI day.
Thank you once again to you all.
And with that, ladies
and gentlemen, we call it a successful DPI
day.
For those WHO are proceeding to the
reception,
it's a ticketed situation.
So those with the tickets will know where
to go.
And lastly,
do not forget aboutthe feedback thatwill
be very helpful for
how this session is iterated.
I've been your host for today. Thank you
so very much. Have a lovely evening.